We've been designing our processing pipelines
to have all the stages operate in lock step,
choosing the clock period to accommodate the
worst-case processing time over all the stages.
This is what we'd call a synchronous, globally
timed system.
But what if there are data dependencies in
the processing time, i.e., if for some data
inputs a particular processing stage might
be able to produce its output in a shorter
time?
Can we design a system that could take advantage
of that opportunity to increase throughput?
One alternative is to continue to use a single
system clock, but for each stage to signal
when it's ready for a new input and when it
has a new output ready for the next stage.
It's fun to design a simple 2-signal handshake
protocol to reliably transfer data from one
stage to the next.
The upstream stage produces a signal called
HERE-IS-X to indicate that is has new data
for the downstream stage.
And the downstream stage produces a signal
called GOT-X to indicate when it is willing
to consume data.
It's a synchronous system so the signal values
are only examined on the rising edge of the
clock.
The handshake protocol works as follows:
the upstream stage asserts HERE-IS-X if it
will have a new output value available at
the next rising edge of the clock.
The downstream stage asserts GOT-X if it will
grab the next output at the rising edge of
the clock.
Both stages look at the signals on the rising
edge of the clock to decide what to do next.
If both stages see that HERE-IS-X and GOT-X
are asserted at the same clock edge, the handshake
is complete and the data transfer happens
at that clock edge.
Either stage can delay a transfer if they
are still working on producing the next output
or consuming the previous input.
It's possible, although considerably more
difficult, to build a clock-free asynchronous
self-timed system that uses a similar handshake
protocol.
The handshake involves four phases.
In phase 1, when the upstream stage has a
new output and GOT-X is deasserted, it asserts
its HERE-IS-X signal and then waits to see
the downstream stage's reply on the GOT-X
signal.
In phase 2, the downstream stage, seeing that
HERE-IS-X is asserted, asserts GOT-X when
it has consumed the available input.
In phase 3, the downstream stage waits to
see the HERE-IS-X go low, indicating that
the upstream stage has successfully received
the GOT-X signal.
In phase 4, once HERE-IS-X is deasserted,
the downstream stage deasserts GOT-X and the
transfer handshake is ready to begin again.
Note that the upstream stage waits until it
sees the GOT-X deasserted before starting
the next handshake.
The timing of the system is based on the transitions
of the handshake signals, which can happen
at any time the conditions required by the
protocol are satisfied.
No need for a global clock here!
It's fun to think about how this self-timed
protocol might work when there are multiple
downstream modules, each with their own internal
timing.
In this example, A's output is consumed by
both the B and C stages.
We need a special circuit, shown as a yellow
box in the diagram, to combine the GOT-X signals
from the B and C stages and produce a summary
signal for the A stage.
Let's take a quick look at the timing diagram
shown here.
After A has asserted HERE-IS-X, the circuit
in the yellow box waits until both the B and
the C stage have asserted their GOT-X signals
before asserting GOT-X to the A stage.
At this point the A stage deasserts HERE-IS-X,
then the yellow box waits until both the B
and C stages have deasserted their GOT-X signals,
before deasserting GOT-X to the A stage.
Let's watch the system in action!
When a signal is asserted we'll show it in
red, otherwise it's shown in black.
A new value for the A stage arrives on A's
data input and the module supplying the value
then asserts its HERE-IS-X signal to let A
know it has a new input.
At some point later, A signals GOT-X back
upstream to indicate that it has consumed
the value, then the upstream stage deasserts
HERE-IS-X, followed by A deasserting its GOT-X
signal.
This completes the transfer of the data to
the A stage.
When A is ready to send a new output to the
B and C stages, it checks that its GOT-X input
is deasserted (which it is),
so it asserts the new output value and signals
HERE-IS-X to the yellow box which forwards
the signal to the downstream stages.
B is ready to consume the new input and so
asserts its GOT-X output.
Note that C is still waiting for its second
input and has yet to assert its GOT-X output.
After B finishes its computation, it supplies
a new value to C and asserts its HERE-IS-X
output to let C know its second input is ready.
Now C is happy and signals both upstream stages
that it has consumed its two inputs.
Now that both GOT-X inputs are asserted, the
yellow box asserts A's GOT-X input to let
it know that the data has been transferred.
Meanwhile B completes its part of the handshake,
and C completes its transaction with B and
A deasserts HERE-IS-X to indicate that it
has seen its GOT-X input.
When the B and C stages see their HERE-IS-X
inputs go low, they their finish their handshakes
by deasserting their GOT-X outputs,
and when they're both low, the yellow box
lets A know the handshake is complete by deserting
A's GOT-X input.
Whew!
The system has returned to the initial state
where A is now ready to accept some future
input value.
This an elegant design based entirely on transition
signaling.
Each module is in complete control of when
it consumes inputs and produces outputs, and
so the system can process data at the fastest
possible speed, rather than waiting for the
worst-case processing delay.